Today is truly a significant milestone
in securing our nation's supply chains
and strengthening America's national
security.
>> This is the kickoff ceremony for a mine,
which the owners say could be critical
to America's military success.
For too long, we've relied on foreign
sources for critical materials essential
to our national defense. A prime example
is Antimony Sulfide.
>> Antimony, the mineral they'll be mining,
is used to make munitions.
>> The company that owns the mine,
Perpetual Resources, has been awarded
$80 million of federal funding as part
of an effort to make America
self-sufficient in critical minerals.
>> Let's have the GENERAL KIND OF
BUT SOME WONDER IF WHAT'S underground
will ever make it into a round of
ammunition.
So, a lot of this mind's critics have
raised some serious questions about both
the quantity and the quality of the
antimony that it contains
or if the real objective is something
more valuable. In essence, all this
public land here is being privatized for
the company's profits.
>> It's basically helping subsidize a
billionaire's gold project.
You talk about Idaho being the gem state
and mining interest, but the real jewels
of the state are the fish in the stream.
We're concerned about permanent loss of
the spawning habitat and chemical
contamination from mining activities
that could contaminate the wershed.
John Robinson and Will Tedman work for
Idaho Conservation League. The group is
suing the Forest Service and other
federal agencies that have granted
permits to reopen a mine in this remote
back country.
>> The big concern is what's the water
quality going to be in this drainage
during and after mining. Once materials
have been mobilized that could
contaminate water supplies, they persist
for decades, if not centuries.
>> It's not the first time the area has
been mined.
>> We're looking down on the Yellow Pine
Pit. This is an abandoned open pit with
the East Fork, South Fork, Salmon River
cascading down into it.
The river was highly contaminated by
decades of mining.
Back in the Second World War, antimony,
the mineral found here, was at the heart
of America's munitions production.
>> In 1940, FDR had set production goals
for 50,000 aircraft. Now, shells, guns,
ships, and tanks, all poured off
American assembly lines.
>> Antimony is used in more than 300 types
of munitions. Without antimony, lead
bullets would be soft. and how its would
not fire
and if you take the sulfur out of it, it
becomes a flame retardant.
>> The Stimnite mine provided 90% of the
antimony used by the Allies, but fell
out of use as America began importing
antimony as it was cheaper than making
it at home.
This mine provided antimony all the way
through World War II into the early
1950s.
After that, it was more or less
abandoned.
The nearest town, Yellow Pine, now has
only 35 residents. And despite the
sustained attempts of one company to
reopen the mine, it failed to get the
necessary backing until now. So in 2011,
a company called Midas Gold purchased
the mine. And over the years, it's been
trying to get through the permitting
process, pushing itself as effectively
under the Biden administration as an
ally in the green economy because of
antimoney's use in lead acid batteries
storage for solar panel energy fields.
But in 2021, China started restricting
the supply of military grade antimony to
the US before cutting it off completely
in 2024.
If you're being told that your biggest
supplier, in this case, China, has now
called up and said, "You can't have any
antimony, that is a problem." It set off
a panic button within not only the
Pentagon, but across the halls of
government.
>> That sparked a big process within the
Defense Department in particular to try
to find other sources.
>> Within a few months of China cutting off
the antimony, the newly elected
president took action.
Several weeks after the inauguration,
Donald Trump issued an executive order
that basically commanded the United
States to set out to develop domestic
supplies of critical minerals.
>> Midas Gold, now rebranded as Perpetual
Resources, saw an opportunity.
>> The company Perpeta started calling
itself a solution to our national
security crisis.
The main shareholder is this man.
His name is John Pollson.
>> John Pollson is a billionaire investor.
He is also a supporter of Donald Trump.
And during the re-election campaign for
Donald Trump, he held a big fundraiser
where he raised over $50 million for
Trump. And with Trump in the White
House, the mind's fortunes began to
change.
A month after Trump's executive order in
March, Pollson hired a new lobbying
company chaired by Ryan Priebus, Trump's
former chief of staff. Lobbyists for
Perpeta have made visits to the White
House, the Defense Department, and
Congress. Federal disclosures show in
May, Perpetual received the final
federal permits for the mine.
But Pollson's interest in the mine isn't
just about antimony. It
>> is not uncommon to find geologically
antimony and gold in the same ore
deposits. And that's what we had going
on here.
>> John Pollson is very interested in this
mine because it's going to provide gold
>> in Perpetua's mine. Although most of the
ore here is antimony, the majority of
revenue will come from gold.
As of January 2026, the value of the
gold in this mine is approaching $19
billion.
A prospect that excited John Paulson on
a recent investor call.
>> I am bullish on the outlook for gold. If
the price goes up, you get a greater
impact if you own a mining company. I
couldn't be more excited about our
equity investment in Perpetual.
This play for gold has angered
conservationists.
>> Under the mining law of 1872,
mining companies don't have to pay any
royalties for gold or other precious
minerals taken from public land. This is
in contrast to oil and coal and gas
where the public does get a royalty
back. In this case, there's no royalties
and the mining company gets all the
profits from the gold.
In essence, all this public land here is
being privatized for the company's
profits.
If we're really trying to restore this
site and extract some mineral wealth out
of this, it would have required leaving
some gold underground.
And I wish that the company had taken a
harder look at that option.
When much of the West and the American
West specifically was explored, there
was relatively lots of easy gold to get.
Now what's left is the much harder gold
to get. And there's an economic break
even point where the harder gold now
becomes economic to to recover. But that
comes at the expense of additional
tailings, additional waste rock,
additional impacts.
>> The method used for getting antimonian
gold out of stimite rock historically is
very environmentally destructive. You
need to add cyanide to it. The rock
itself already contains arsenic.
And historically at this mine, those
tailings after that process were just
put into piles and left to leech arsenic
and cyanide into the water supply.
Right here would be the location of the
tailing storage facility. It would be
about 480 ft tall. That is about 30 ft
taller than the Great Pyramid of Giza.
By volume, the tailing storage facility
could hold about 29 great pyramids of
Giza. So covering a very vast large
area, vast amount of waste, toxic
metals, arsenic stored within there.
Perpetual says that the liners that it's
going to put in there, kind of like a
giant burrito wrap, are as infallible as
they can get. the state-of-the-art
technology.
But the environmentalists that I talked
to say these tailings are going to be
here for millennia and there's no way
that you can ensure that this will never
ever leech arsenic and cyanide into the
environment.
Our
first task in engineering and designing
a mining project is what is the safest
plan available and what does the science
tell us that the safest location to
store the tailings and the waste is to
build that tailing storage facility in
the upper reach of Meadow Creek Valley.
Despite Perpeta's assurances about the
mine, back in Washington, some officials
voiced serious concerns.
>> The Defense Department gave Perpeta $80
million to figure out a way to get this
antimony out of the ground. In the
meantime, there was an ongoing
conversation, even as the money was
going out the door, that this was not
money well spent. sources of mine in
Washington heard of an internal
conversation in which there was one side
saying yes, this is the way to go and
another side saying it's just never
going to work. Perpetuous says that it
can supply 100% of US military needs.
>> The US military requires antimony to be
refined to 70.5%.
Perpetuous says it can refine its
antimony to 54.3%.
and that it would require additional
processing offsite.
>> In the 1940s, you have this great grade
supplying the Allied forces.
And then you have a point where you've
depleted the mine significantly.
Half a century later, nothing's changed.
It's still the same low or grade. The
question becomes, is it economically
feasible to process it into the grade
that you need at a gold mine that may or
may not end up producing the antimony
that's needed.
Back in Idaho, there's another opponent
to the mine, arguing that the project
also encroaches on ancient land rights.
This landscape right here has been what
has taken care of our people for
thousands of years, the fish and the
roots that are here, the wildlife.
>> EMTT Taylor Jr. is part of the Neespur
tribe who have treaty rights dating back
to 1863
to fish and hunt on this land. We cannot
lose these populations,
not just for us, but for seven
generations down the road.
The Nespers tribe originally helped
frontiersmen find gold in this area of
Idaho,
but as a result of that gold, they were
then pushed into smaller and smaller
areas of their own land.
So that's what gold has been to the
Nespers people. It has taken our land
away. It has taken so much from us. And
so when we see another gold mine like
this going in, we see the same thing
happening.
The Nespur tribe is also suing the
Forest Service and Department of
Agriculture, saying the mine violates
their right to the land and could
endanger critical fish stock, including
Chinuk salmon.
Mining is not due to start here until
2029, by which point it may no longer be
the only source of domestic antimony.
other options are now coming onto the
table in a way that they wouldn't have
10 years ago. The question then is,
should we have put all this money in
there in the first place? And also, now
that we know this, is it still worth our
time moving forward?